---

Title: The Explorations at Jerusalem
transcriber: Ryan Cordell
Date: 1871-06-29
Newspaper: New National Era
Location: Washington, D.C.
Author: Lyman Abbott
Cited source: Harper's Magazine
Page URL: https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn84026753/1871-06-29/ed-1/seq-1/

---

**The Explorations at Jerusalem.**

The first operations were commenced on the western wall, at a point near what is known as Wilson's Arch. It receives the name from the fact that it was first discovered by Captain Wilson, who had not the means, however, to prosecute any mining operations. Captain Warren's explorations proved this arch to be one of a series forming a viaduct which led from the Temple toward the palace of Herod on the western hill, and constituting perhaps the very bridge across which Jesus was conducted from Pilate to Herod on the day of his trial. The remains of a winding aqueduct, cut in the solid rock beneath this bridge, were also discovered. Part of this bridge has fallen, and broken and buried the aqueduct in its fall; and the original pavement of the ancient road in the valley itself is forty-five feet below the present surface formed by the ruins of the ancient wall and houses. Nor is this all. A perfect net-work of subterranean chambers was also disclosed, some of which were probably used for the storage of food, and others as aqueducts and cisterns. And the whole result more than confirms the ideas of Jewish architectural grandeur which the books of the Bible and the pages of Josephus combined to give, but which have hitherto been regarded by many skeptical minds as apocryphal.

Along the southern wall his discoveries were scarcely less interesting. Here he found a double pavement, one twenty-three, the other forty-three feet below the present surface of the ground. Here also he found some curious remains both of Hebrew and of Christian origin. The following description of his explorations at this point, taken from one of his letters written at the time, will afford the reader a more graphic picture of the difficulties and dangers which attended his investigations than can be given by any general description:

"On Friday, having arrived at a depth of seventy-nine feet, the men were breaking up a stone at the bottom of the shaft. Suddenly the ground gave way, down went the stone and the hammer, the men barely saving themselves. They at once rushed up, and told the sergeant they had found the bottomless pit. I went down to the spot and examined it; and, in order that you may have an idea of the extent of our work, I will give you a description of our descent.

"The shaft mouth is on the south side of the Sanctuary wall, near the southwest angle, among the prickly-pears; beside it, to the east, lying against the Sanctuary wall, is a large mass of rubbish that has been brought up; while over the mouth itself is a triangular gin, with iron wheel attached, with guy, for running up the excavated soil. Looking down the shaft, one sees that it is lined for the first twenty feet with frames four feet six inches in the clear; further down the Sanctuary wall and soil cut through are seen, and a man standing at what appears to be the bottom. An order is given to this man, who repeats it, and then, faintly, is heard a sepulchral voice answering, as it were, from another world. Reaching down tot he man who is visible is a thirty-four-feet rope-latter; and, on descending by it, one finds he is standing on a ledge which the ladder does not touch by four feet. This ledge is a top of a wall running north and south, and abutting on she Sanctuary wall; its east face just cuts the centre of the shaft, which has to be canted off about two feet toward the east, just where some large loose stones jut out in the most disagreeable manner. Here five more frames have been fixed to keep these stones steady. On peering down from this ledge one sees the Sanctuary wall, with its projecting courses, until they are lost in the darkness below; observing also, at the same time, that two sides of the shaft are cut through the soil and are self-supporting. Now to descend this second drop the ladder is again required; accordingly, having told the man at the bottom to get under cover, it is lowered to the ledge, from whence it is found that it does not reach to the bottom by several feet. It is therefore lowered to the the required distance, and one has to reach it by climbing down hand over hand for about twelve feet. On passing alone one notes the marvelous joints of the Sanctuary wall stones, and also, probably, gets a few blows on skull and knuckles from falling pebbles. Just on reaching the bottom one recollects there is still a pit of unknown depth to be explored, and cautiously straddle across it. Then can be seen that one course in the Sanctuary wall, near the bottom, is quite smooth all over, the stone being finely dressed, around the drafts; one also sees two stout boards lying against the Santuary wall, under which the men retire whenever an accidental shower of stones renders their position dangerous. One is now at a depth of seventy-nine feet from the surface, and from here we commence the exploring of the 'bottomless pit.' After dropping a rope down, we found that it was only six feet deep, though it looked black enough for any thing."

Further explorations disclosed a subterranean passage, perhaps orginally constructed to carry off the overflow from the Temple; and the intrepid investigator crawled on his hands and feet 400 feet along the slimy drain through the mud, the passage at times becoming so narrow that he could barely squeeze through, and the air so foul as to threaten suffocation. The difficulty of his position is indicated by the fact that he had to back out 200 feet before he could get to a point where he could turn his head.—From "The Recovery of Jerusalem," by Lyman Abbott, in *Harper's Magazine* for July.
