---

Title: Chinese Gossip
transcriber: Ryan Cordell
Date: 1871-06-17
Newspaper: Evening Telegraph
Location: Philadelphia, PA
Author: na
Cited source: na
Page URL: https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83025925/1871-06-17/ed-1/seq-1/

---

**CHINESE GOSSIP.**

**Fancy of a Fashionable Belle for a Heathen Chinee.**

An unusual tit-bit is now going the rounds of fashionable gossip, says the New York *Star*, relating to the strange fancy of an up-town belle for a veritable "heathen Chinee."

The young lady in question is an exceedingly stylish and handsome brunette, who has been splendidly educated at the Georgetown Convent, where she graduated about a year ago. Since that time she has been the sole mistress of her father's elegant and aristocratic mansion near Murray Hill.

The young lady is motherless, and an only child. She has been indulged in every whim by her fond father, who is immensely proud of his daughter's beauty and accomplishments. About six months ago the father took into the household as butler or steward a remarkably clever and intelligent China-man. "Cat-like, dreamy-eyed, yellow, and slim," the new butler performed his duties admirably. It was not long, however, before the almond eyes of the Asiatic and the sparkling orbs of his beautiful mistress interchanged many glances of admiration whenever the duties of the household brought them together in consultation.

Long and more frequent became their interviews. More and more interested were they in the household accounts and—with each other. The servants whispered among themselvees about the strange intimacy between their mistress and that "Heathen Chinee, whose smile was so child-like and bland." About two weeks ago the father came home unexpectedly, and, entering the library suddenly, was horror-struck at the sight of his lovely daughter in the arms of the loving "Celestial." The way that he went for that "Heathen Chinee" would have gladdened the heart of Mr. William Nye, could he have witnessed the scene that ensued.

In vain the daughter cried, and pleaded her love, avowing her determination to marry him. It only added fuel to the flame of wrath consuming her father's heart. John was forcibly convinced of the necessity of an immediate departure not only from the house, but from New York also. Bountifully supplied with "Melican man's money," he is now fast nearing China, leaving his lovely and loving brunette, surrounded by watchful eyes, to mourn the loss of her Mongolian lover, and await with resignation the "coming man."
