---

Title: Aethra-Missing
transcriber: Ryan Faith
Date: 1909-08-01
Newspaper: The San Francisco Call
Location: San Francisco, CA
Author: na
Cited source: na
Page URL: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn85066387/1909-08-01/ed-1/?sp=25

---

LOST In the starry heavens, one asteroid known “Aethra” registered No. 123, but believed to be masquerading under an assumed number; missing since 1873; please notify any astronomer, staff of University of California preferred. Reward, .a degree of doctor of philosophy to finder.

BERKELEY, July 31. - A.J. Champreux, instructor, in the department of astronomy of the university, is trying to answer the foregoing advertisement known to every astronomer, and he believes he will succeed in his task which will have for its goal the cap and gown of the doctor of philosophy.  He may conclude his. undertaking next May, and hopes to win the coveted honor.
The asteroid Aethra was lost in 1873 shortly after its discovery and in spite of the. vigilant search for it the heavenly body" is effectively hidden both to the telescope and to the camera as if it were the proverbial needle in a hay stack.

LOST IN SPACE
Just how it was lost no one seems to know. It was discovered, given a registered number and then forgotten for a time. Then when an astronomer tried, to locate the asteroid again the tiny celestial body, was nowhere, to be found.
It had disappeared; completely, and telescope after telescope was trained on where it should have been to purpose, and Aethra was put down in the books, of the astronomers as lost.

A. J. Champreux of the students’ observatory staff of the university does not intend to be thus thwarted -and has started-to work to find the asteroid, which seems to have strayed from the fold.
He has been at his task now for several months and he will have to compute the orbits of fully 800 known asteroids before he can find the missing body.
MAY HAVE WANDERED
He is of the opinion that Aethra, influenced by some attraction, wandered from its orbit and was picked up again and given another number. This theory will be known, however, when all the orbits of the asteroids are calculated.
Champreux's reward will be the degree-of a doctor of philosophy if he succeeds in locating Aethra, and should such; be the case Aethra's discoverer will be known as Doctor Champreux, a distinction of honor in the faculty of the university.
The university faculty member is one of the brightest students of class of 1905, and his brilliancy in mathematics has won for him recognition in astronomy.

Perhaps some day we shall board the rocket ship for another journey into space.
