---
Title: South Pole of the Moon
transcriber: Ryan Faith
Date: 1914-03-27
Newspaper: The Ordway New Era
Location: Ordway, CO
Author: na  
Cited source: na
Page URL: https://www.loc.gov/item/sn90051033/1914-03-27/ed-1/
---

Astronomers, by the aid of powerful instrumental means, probe the very heart of the south pole of the moon. With ease and comfort, we gaze down upon all that is to be seen. Were man to place himself there, he would add but little to our present knowledge. Every mountain, hillock, craterlet, and even surface crack has been carefully recorded. Indeed, in a typographical sense, we know more about the moon than we do not only of the Earth's Antarctic lands, but even also of central Africa. The fact that there is an almost complete absence of air upon our satellite renders the minutest surface features clearly visible. The fact also that this globe constitutes our nearest neighbor in space allows lunar exploration to be conducted in silence through great telescopes, without the accompaniment of perilous adventure. Our knowledge of the lunar world teaches us of a planet that may be totally unlike our own; of a globe minus both air and water and every essential to life existence. In fact, we are taught of a world with the conditions for life destruction; of a planet where rain and wind storms to erode and obliterate the mountains were never known, and where the rough-cast surface, in its original state and exposed to our scrutiny, stands today precisely as it was molded into shape by the Creator many millions of years ago. With the absence of atmosphere, the surface is unaffected by position in latitude, and whereas we might look for a snow or ice clad pole, the once igneous rocks, caused by the comical fire, are there as barren and exposed to our view as at the equator. Monotony and silence pervade the entire planet. Within the regions of the lunar south pole, the superscription of the surface remains untarnished. Every vestige as crisp and bright as when it left the hands of the Almighty. No human being could visit the scene without taking with him a supply of air and water. Even then he would find the temperature standing at 3000 degrees below zero.

The strange conditions of the lunar landscape which would meet the eye of the explorer would be weird, baffling, and yet beautiful. Dawn, as we know it, would have no counterpart on the moon, for absence of air means no diffused light. The untempered rays of the sun would appear suddenly upon the black horizon, crowding the mountain peaks with a dazzling whiteness, with their flanks and valleys yet in utter darkness. To the lunar spectator, this sunrise would be unaccompanied by the gorgeous glowing sky tints so familiar on Earth. No atmosphere would mean no skylight, and the solar beams would burn as fiercely as a gigantic electric light a few feet from the eye. With no diffusing vapor, the sky, even at midday, would appear darker than that with which we are familiar on moonless nights, and the stars would shine brighter than ever before. The instant one stepped into the shadow of a crag, he would become invisible. However loud, no sound could be heard, and even a landslide would be known only by the tremor it produced. As far as the eye could reach, the entire landscape would resemble some awful nightmare of desolation and lifelessness, a vision of a world where life has failed to dawn, and of a planet deemed unworthy to become the abode of intelligent beings.
