---

Title: Excelsior
transcriber: Ryan Cordell
Date: 1842-01-06
Newspaper: The New-York Tribune
Location: New York, New York
Author: Henry W[adsworth] Longfellow
Cited source: na
Page URL: http://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83030212/1842-01-06/ed-1/seq-4/

---

The shades of night were falling fast,
As through an Alpine village passed
A youth who bore, 'mid snow and ice,
A banner with the strange device.
{:.indent-4}Excelsior!

His brow was sad, his eye beneath,
Flashed like a falchion from its sheath;
And like a silver clarion rung
The accents of that unknown tongue,
{:.indent-4}Excelsior!

In happy homes he saw the light
Of household fires gleam warm and bright
Above, the spectral glaciers shone,
And from his lips escaped a groan,
{:.indent-4}Excelsior!

"Try not the Pass!" the old man said;
"Dark lowers the tempest overhead,
The roaring torrent is deep and wide!"
And loud that clarion voice replied
{:.indent-4}Excelsior!

"Oh stay," the maiden said, "and rest
Thy weary head upon this breast!"
A tear stood in his bright blue eye,
But still he answered, with a sigh,
{:.indent-4}Excelsior!

"Beware the pine tree's withered branch!
Beware the awful avalanche!"
This was the peasant's last good night,
A voice replied, far up the hight,
{:.indent-4}Excelsior!

At break of day, as heavenward
The pious monks of Saint Bernard
Uttered the oft repeated prayer,
A voice cried through the startled air
{:.indent-4}Excelsior!

A traveler, by the faithful hound,
Half buried in the snow was found,
Still grasping in his hand of ice
That banner with the strange device
{:.indent-4}Excelsior!

There in the twilight cold and gray,
Lifeless but beautiful, he lay,
And from the sky, serene and far,
A voice fell, like a falling star!
{:.indent-4}Excelsior!
