---

Title: A Good Wife
transcriber: Avery Blankenship
Date: 1843-05-27
Newspaper: The Radical
Location: Bowling Green, Montana
Author: na
Cited source:  na
Page URL: https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83016922/1843-05-27/ed-1/seq-4/

---

A Good Wife
Is to man, wisdom and courage and strength. No condition is hopeless-, when the wife possesses firmness, de­cision, energy and economy. Man is strong, but his heart is not ada­mant, lie delights in enterprise and action, but to sustain him, he need a tranquil mind and a whole heart. He expends his whole moral force in the conflicts of the world. His feelings are daily lacerated to the utmost point of endurance, by perpetual collision, irritation and disappointment. To recover his equanimity and composure, home must be to him, a place of repose, of peace, cheerfulness, of com forts: and his soul renews its strength, and again goes forth with fresh vigor, to encounter the labors and troubles of the world. Let woman know then. that she ministers at the very foun­tain of life and happiness. Her ardent spirit breathes the breath of life into all her enterprises. Her patience and constancy are mainly instrumental in carrying out to completion the best human designs. Her more delicate moral sensibility is ever at work, to purify and refine society and the nearest glimpse of heaven that mortals ever can get on earth, is that domestic circle, which her hand have trained to intelligence, virtue and love: which her gentle influence pervades, and of which her radiant presence is the centre and the sun.
