---

title: Twelve Ways of Committing Suicide
transcriber: Ryan Cordell
date: 1856-08-16
Newspaper: Nebraska Advertiser
Location: Brownville, NE [Nebraska Territory]
Author: na  
Cited source: American Medical and Surgical Journal
Page URL: https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn84020109/1856-08-16/ed-1/seq-1/

---

**TWELVE WAYS OF COMMITTING SUICIDE.**

1. Wearing of thin shoes and cotton stockings on damp nights, and in cool rainy weather. Wearing insufficient clothing, and especially upon the limbs and extremities.
2. Leading a life of enfeebling, stupid laziness, and keeping the mind in an unnatural state of excitement by reading trashy novels. Going to theaters, parties, and balls in all sorts of weather, in the thinnest possible dress. Dancing, till in a complete prespiration [sic], and then going home without sufficient over-garments, through the cool, damp air. 
3. Sleeping on feather beds in seven-by-nine bed rooms, without ventilation at the top of the windows, and especially with two or more persons in the same small, unventilated bed-room.
4. Surfeiting on hot and very stimulating dinners. Eating in a hurry, without half masticating your food, and eating heartily before going to bed every night, when the mind and body are exhausted by the toils of the day, and the excitement of the evening.
5. Beginning in childhood on tea and coffee, and going from one step to another chewing and smoking tobacco, and drinking intoxicating liquors. By personal abuse, and physical and mental excesses of every description.
6. Marrying in haste and getting an uncongenial companion, and living the remainder of life in mental dissatisfaction. Cultivating jealousies and domestic broils, and being always in mental ferment.
7. Keeping children quiet by giving paregoric and cordials, by teaching them to suck candy, and by supplying them with raisins, nut, and rich cake. When they are sick, by giving them *mercury, tartar emetic*, and *arsenic*, under the mistaken notion that they are medicines, and not irritant poisons. 
8. Allowing the love of gain to absorb our minds, so as to leave no time to attend our health. Following an unhealthy occupation because money can be made by it.
9. Tempting the appetite with bitters and niceties, when the stomach says No, and by forcing food when nature does not demand and even rejects it. Gormandizing between meals.
10. Contriving to keep in a continual worry about something or nothing. Giving way to fits of anger. 
11. Being irregular in all our habits of sleeping or eating, going to bed at midnight and getting up at noon.—Eating too much, too many kinds of food, and that which is too highly seasoned.
12. Neglecting to take proper care of ourselves, and not apply early for medical advise [sic] when disease first appears. Taking celebrated quack medicines to a degree of making a drug shop of the body.

The above causes produce more sickness, suffering, and death, than all epidemics, malaria and contagion, combined with war, pestilence and famine. Nearly all who have attained an old age have been remarkable for equinimity of temper, correct habits of diet, drink, and rest—for temperance, cheerfulness, and morality. Physical punishment is sure to visit the transgressor of nature's laws. All commit suicide, and cut off many years of their natural life, who do not observe the means for preventing disease, and of preserving health.—*American Medical and Surg. Journal*.