---
Title: Wanted—a Printer
transcriber: Ryan Cordell
Date: 1860-01-05
Newspaper: Daily Intelligencer
Location: Wheeling, VA [WV]
Author:   
Cited source: 
Page URL: https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn84026845/1860-01-05/ed-1/seq-1/
---

**Wanted—a Printer.**

"Wanted—a printer," says a contemporary. Wanted—a mechanical curiosity, with brain and fingers; a thing that will set so many ems a day; a machine that will think and act, but still a machine; a being who undertakes the most systematic and monotonous drudgery—yet one the ingenuity of man has never supplanted, mechanically; that's a printer. 

A printer: yet, for all his dissipated and reckless habits, a worker—at all times and hours, by day and by night; setting up in close and unwholesome offices, when gay crowds are hurrying to theatres; later still, when street revellers (sic) are gone and the city sleeps; in the fresh air of the morning, in the broad and gushing sunlight, some printing machine is at its case, with its eternal, unvarying click! click!

Click! click! the polished cubes fall into he stick; the mute integers of expression are marshaled into line, and march forth as immortal print. Click! and the latest intelligence becomes old, the thought a principle, the simple idea a living sentiment. Click! click! from grave to gay, item after item—a robbery, a murder, a bit of scandal, a graceful and glowing thought, are in turn clothed by the mute and impassive fingers of the machine, and set adrift in the sea of thought. He must not think of the future nor recall the past; he must not think of home, of kindred, of wife, or of babe. His work lies before him, and thought is chained to his copy. 

You know him by his works, who read the papers, and are quick at typographical errors; whose eye may rest on this mute evidence of ceaseless toil; correspondents, editors, and authors, who scorn the simple medium of your fame, think not that the printer is altogether a machine. Think not that he is indifferent to the gem of which he is but the setter. Think not a subtle ray may not penetrate the recesses of his heart, or the flowers he gathers may not leave some of their fragrance on his toil-worn fingers. But when you seek friend, companion, adviser—when you would elevate one who, from sympathy, may fitly represent either or both—when you want judges, governors, and presidents, O, ye people, advertise: "Wanted—a printer."