---

Title: The Children
transcriber: Ryan Cordell
Date: 1864-09-22
Newspaper: Maysville weekly bulletin
Location: Maysville, KY
Author: The Village Schoolmaster [Charles M. Dickinson]
Cited source: na
Page URL: http://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn84038223/1864-09-22/ed-1/seq-4/

---

When the lessons and tasks are all ended,
{:.indent-1}And the school for the day is dismissed,
The little ones gather around me
{:.indent-1}To bid me good night and be kissed;
O! the little white arms that encircle
{:.indent-1}My neck, in their tender embrace,
O! the smiles that are halos of heaven,
{:.indent-1}Shedding sunshine of love on my face.

And when they are gone, I sit dreaming
{:.indent-1}Of my childhood, too lovely to last!
Of love that my heart will remember
{:.indent-1}While it wakes to the pulse of the past
Ere the world and its wickedness made me
{:.indent-1}A partner of sorrow and sin;
When the glory of God was about me,
{:.indent-1}And the glory of gladness within.

O! my heart grows as weak as a woman's,
{:.indent-1}And the fount of my feelings will flow,
When I think of the paths deep and stony,
{:.indent-1}Where the feet of the dear ones must go;
Of the mountains of sin hanging o'er them—
{:.indent-1}Of the tempests of Fate blowing wild,
O! there's nothing on earth half so holy,
{:.indent-1}As the innocent heart of a child!

They are idols of hearts and of households
{:.indent-1}They are angels of God in disguise;
His sunlight still sleeps in their tresses;
{:.indent-1}His glory still gleams in their eyes;
O! those truants from home and from heaven,
{:.indent-1}They have made me more manly and mild;
And I know, now, how Jesus could liken
{:.indent-1}The kingdom of God to a child.

I ask not a life for the dear one
{:.indent-1}All radiant, as others have done,
But that life may have just enough shadow
{:.indent-1}To temper the glare of the sun;
I would pray God to guard them from evil,
{:.indent-1}But my prayers would bound back to myself.
Ah! a seraph may pray for a sinner,
{:.indent-1}But a sinner must pray for himself.

The twig is so easily bended
{:.indent-1}I have banished the rule and the rod;
I have taught them the goodness of knowledge
{:.indent-1}They have taught e the goodness of God;
My heart is a dungeon of darkness
{:.indent-1}Where I shut the for breaking a rule,
My frown is sufficient correction,
{:.indent-1}My love is the law of the school.

I shall leave the old house in the autumn,
{:.indent-1}To traverse its threshhold no more;
Ah! how shall I sigh for the dear ones
{:.indent-1}That meet me each morn at the door!
I shall miss the "good-nights," and the kisses,
{:.indent-1}And the gush of their innocent glee,
The group on the green, and the flowers
{:.indent-1}That are brought every morning for me.

I shall miss them at morn and at eve—
{:.indent-1}Their song in the school and the street;
I shall miss the low hum of their voices,
{:.indent-1}And the tramp of their delicate feet.
When the lessons of life are all ended,
{:.indent-1}And death says, "The school is dismissed!"
May the little ones gather around me,
{:.indent-1}To bid me good-night and be kissed.
