---

Title: A Woman's Answer to a Man's Question
transcriber: Ryan Cordell
Date: 1871-01-26
Newspaper: The Tiffin Tribune
Location: Tiffin, Ohio
Author: Lena Lathrop
Cited source: na
Page URL: http://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn87076794/1871-01-26/ed-1/seq-1/

---

Do you know you have asked for the costliest thing
{:.indent-1}Ever made by the hand above?
A woman's heart and a woman's life—
{:.indent-1}And a woman's wonderful love?

Do you know you have asked for the priceless thing
{:.indent-1}As a child might ask for a toy?
Demanding what others have died to win,
{:.indent-1}With the reckless dash of a boy?

You have written my lesson of duty out—
{:.indent-1}Man-like you have questioned me;
Now stand at the bar of woman's soul,
{:.indent-1}Until I shall question thee.

You require your mutton shall be always hot,
{:.indent-1}Your socks and shirts be whole;
I require your heart to be true as a God's stars,
{:.indent-1}And pure as Heaven your soul.

You require a cook for your mutton and beef,
{:.indent-1}I require a far greater thing;
A seamstress you're wanting for sock and for shirts,
{:.indent-1}I look for a man and a king—

A king for the beautiful realm called home,
{:.indent-1}And a man that the Maker, God
Shall look upon as He did on the first,
{:.indent-1}And say, "It is very good."

I am fair and young, but the rose will fade,
{:.indent-1}From my soft, young cheek one day—
Will you love me then 'mid the falling leaves
{:.indent-1}As you did 'mong the blooms of May?

Is your heart an ocean so strong and deep
{:.indent-1}I may launch my all on its tide!
A loving woman finds heaven or hell
{:.indent-1}On the day she is made a bride.

I require all things that are good and true,
{:.indent-1}All things that a man should be;
If you give this all, I would stake my life
{:.indent-1}To be all you demand of me.    

If you cannot be this—a laundress and cook
{:.indent-1}You can hire, with little to pay;
But a woman's heart and a woman's life
{:.indent-1}Are not to be won that way.
