---

Title: Tired Mothers
transcriber: Ryan Cordell
Date: 1872-09-06
Newspaper: Vermont Phœnix
Location: Brattleboro, VT
Author: na
Cited source: the Aldine
Page URL: http://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn98060050/1872-09-06/ed-1/seq-4/

---

A little elbow leans upon your knee,
Your tired knee, that has so much to bear;
A child's dear eyes are looking lovingly
From underneath a thatch of tangled hair.
Perhaps you do not heed the velvet touch
Of warm, moist fingers, folding yours so tight;—
You do not prize this blessing over-much,
You almost are too tired to pray tonight.

But it *is* blessedness! A year ago
I did not see it as I do today,—
We are so dull and thankless; and too slow
To catch the sunshine till it slips away.
And now it seems surpassing strange to me,
That, while I wore the badge of mother-hood,
I did not kiss more oft, and tenderly,
The little child that brought me only good.

And if, some night when you sit down to rest,
You miss this elbow from your tired knee;
This restless, curling head from off your breast,
This lisping tongue that chatters constantly;
If from your own the dimpled hands had slipped,
And ne'er would nestle in your palm again;
If the white feet into their grave had tripped,
I could not blame you for your heart-ache then!

I wonder that mothers ever fret,
At little children clinging to their gown;
Or that the foot-prints, when the days are wet,
Are ever black enough to make them frown.
If I could find a little muddy boot,
Or cap, or jacket, on my chamber floor;
If I could kiss a rosy, restless foot,
And hear its patter in my home once more;

If I could mend a broken cart today,
Tomorrow make a kite, to reach the sky—
There is no woman in God's world could say
She was more blissfully content than I.
But ah! the dainty pillow next my own
Is never rumpled by a shining head;—
My singing birdling from its nest has flown;
The little boy I used to kiss is dead!
—From the Aldine for September.
